Task 1: If songs.db contains the top 100 songs of one listener from 2018, how would you characterize their audio aura?

Answer: The listeners averages are: Energy: 0.66, Valence: 0.48; Danceability: 0.72
Based on the averages calculated the person's main aura is Purple, because
Danceability and Energy is highest. The second tier aura would be orange,
since energy with an average of 0.65 ranks second.

Task 2: Hypothesize about why the way you’ve calculated this aura might not be very representative of the listener. What better ways of calculating this aura would you propose?

Answer:

Definition:

First of all, one could ask how to properly define a music aura?
I would simply define an aura as a state of mind a particular person is in over a specific period of time.
(Not relevant in this context but noteworthy: Since aura implicates that other people can sense it, a person might externalize a state of mind through various mechanisms (mimic, gestures, etc).
Since we cannot verify this real world behaviour, I would propose that spoitfy is really only looking at the most frequent state of mind a person is in and then assuming it is also an aura.)
For an aura to become a music aura the person is choosing to stabilize, enhance or minimize their state of mind through music.

Assumptions:
Is every person always leveraging music to manipulate their current state of mind? Probably not, but for the sake of this discussion let's assume they do.
To simplify the thought experiment, let's also assume that every person always chooses to stabalize their current state of mind.
These assumptions implicate that the characteristics of the music actually always represent a person's current state of mind.

Calculating a state of mind:
How would you mathematically define a state of mind? Since a state of mind is experienced over a fixed period of time,
it is the consequitve listening behaviour during a period of time that defines the state of mind. Consequitve listening behaviour is defined as the selection of songs
listened to with a maximum break of (let's say) 1 minute within a period of time listening. Also, let's say we only regard periods of time over 15 minutes as a state of mind.
As an example: A person listens for 30 minutes to a veriety of songs that have a high energy score on average.
Hence the person is in a high energy state of mind.
Lastly, we need to do is capture all the music that was listed to during the various state of minds within a year.
--> Unfortunately in this Spotify data set there are no time stamps of when songs where listened to, so we cannot calculate a state of mind.

Defining music auras:
With the new concept for state of minds above, we can continue to use averages of the various music characteristics to determine an aura.
So we just need to define the ranges of the different music characteristics averages of a music aura. A "Purple" aura might be characterised as:

Energy: 0.5 - 0.8
Valance: 0.0 - 0.5
Danceability: 0.6 - 1

We need to make sure that we cover all possible combinations of ranges within our aura definitions.

Final step:
Lastly we need to classify all state of minds a person was in within a year with our aura range definitions and count the various state of minds.
The state of mind with the highest count determines the strongest music aura a person has. The second most frequent the second strongest music aura, etc.

E voila, we have a more precise person characterization tool.


